---
tags:
  - CSE_122
---
# LoRa (Long Range)
- Proprietary LoRa PHY is owned by company `Semtech` 
- Low rate (1-20 kbps) and long range (2-20 km)
- Most popular [[Wide Area Networks#Low Power WANs (LPWANs)|LPWAN]] protocol
- Uses **Chirp Spread Spectrum** (CSS), a modulation technique where frequency is varied linearly within a channel. See this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dxYY097QNs0). 
- Data is modulated in starting and ending points of a chirp. The frequency increases linearly, modulo bounds of the channel. 
```
[f_high]      /|    /|    /|    /      /|  /  |   / |    /
             / |   / |   / |   /      / | /   |  /  |   /
[f_ctr]     /  |  /  |  /  |  /      /  |/    | /   |  /
           /   | /   | /   | /      /   |    /|/    | /
[f_low]   /    |/    |/    |/      /    |   / |    /|/
        ------------------------- -----------------------
            UNMODULATED              MODULATED
```
- LoRaWAN can have 1-bit encoding or 2-bit encoding. In general, $n$ bits means we need to divide the total bandwidth into $2^{n}$ discrete starting frequencies. The total number of unique symbols generated by these cyclic shifts is exactly $2^{n}$. 
- In the US, we have 64, 125 kHz uplink channels (1-5 kbps data rate) and eight 500 kHz downlink channels. 

# LoRa Collisions
What happens when LoRa waves collide? First, we use the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to get the frequency. If the chirps are different, we'll still see different frequencies. However, if they are the same, then we'll see very similar frequencies. This is because of *hardware offsets*, and is called Carrier Frequency Offsets (CFO). This.... does not always work. 

> AKA Choir.

We can also have timing offsets from when the packets are sent. 

# Recovering Weak LoRa Signals
In the **Charm** paper, it takes advantage of multiple gateways in range of a device, and combines them into one. We also need to synchronize the clocks at the exact same time. 

This requires GPS to synchronize the signal arrival time. 

# Recovering LoRa Signals with Bad CRCs
We can recover packets with bad [[Data Link Layer#Error Control|CRCs]]. This is called **Opportunistic Packet Recovery** (OPR). What if we had some information about where the interference might have occurred during the signal transition? OPR demonstrates we can recover packets. 
1. receive bits even for bad packets
2. measure [[RSSI]] for each bit along the way 
3. look for changes in RSSI that signals interference
4. try different values for the affected bits until the CRC matches

This mostly works, corrects $\approx 72\%$ of CRC errors. Original [paper](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3386901.3388915). 

There is also **Busy-Signal Multiple Access** (BSMA). As it turns out, [[Medium Access Control#Contention-Based Protocols|CSMA/CA]] has a higher throughput, reducing time/energy wasted on packet collisions. Unfortunately, the [[Medium Access Control#Hidden Terminal Problem|Hidden Terminal Problem]] can make devices not hear each other. Thus, devices fail to to detect simultaneous transmissions $70\%$ of the time. 

